---
title:  "HTTP"
tags: documentation
---

HTTP is an integral part of almost any web app. OutWatch tries to make it as easy as possible to dispatch HTTP requests, while retaining the reactive and functional paradigm.

Let's look at the api for the simplest type of HTTP request, the GET-request:
{% highlight scala %}
def get(urls: Observable[String]): Observable[HttpResponse]
{% endhighlight %}


This function takes a stream of URLs as Strings and returns a stream of `HttpResponse`s.
This way everytime the original stream emits a URL, an HTTP request will be sent to the given URL and emit the response on the returned stream.

Let's look at a small example, in which we have a search field and want to access some external API.
{% highlight scala %}
val queries = createStringHandler()

val requests = queries
  .map(query => s"https://someurl.org?query=$query")
  .debounceTime(300 millis)

val responses = Http.get(requests)
  .map(_.body)

val root = div(
  input(inputString --> queries),
  span(child <-- responses)
)

OutWatch.render("#app", root)
{% endhighlight %}

Here we use the `debounceTime` operator, so that we only get the latest values of our search field within a 300 ms time window.
Then we map our response stream to the body of the HTTP response and show it inside of a `span`.

It's important here to understand that the response stream emits *after* the HTTP request is completed, while the request stream emits *before* the HTTP request is complete.


### Other HTTP methods

The previous function for GET-requests works well, because usually, our GET-requests don't have any bodies. POST-, PUT- or the other HTTP requests usually have some kind of data in JSON or XML inside their bodies.

That's why, for all of our HTTP verbs (GET included) we have this kind of function:
{% highlight scala %}
def post(requests: Observable[Request]): Observable[Response]
{% endhighlight %}

The `HttpRequest` type has all the parameters you'd expect when dispatching HTTP requests. As an example, let's create a simple app to dispatch POST-requests.

{% highlight scala %}
val url = "https://someurl.org/people"

val people = createStringHandler()
val clicks = createStringHandler()

val requests = clicks
  .map(person => Request(url, person))

val responses = Http.post(requests)
  .mapTo(1)
  .scan(0)(_ + _)
  .map(_ + " responses received!")

val root = div(
  input(inputString --> people),
  button(click(people) --> clicks, "POST")
  span(child <-- responses)
)

OutWatch.render("#app", root)
{% endhighlight %}

Whenever we click the button, this app dispatches a POST-request, with the text of our text field as it's body.
It then gathers the amount of responses received and displays them in a `span`. This example demonstrates how to send a POST-request, but the same pattern can be used to create GET, PUT, DELETE or any other HTTP request.
